.TH RENAME-SIMPLE 1 "2026-05-15" "rename-simple 0.2.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rename-simple \- clean filenames to lowercase, ASCII-safe slugs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rename-simple
[OPTIONS] \fIfiles\fR...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rename-simple
renames files and/or directories by normalising accented characters, replacing
spaces and special characters with hyphens, and lowercasing everything.
.PP
Each \fIfiles\fR argument is an entry that is renamed \fBitself\fR (like the
traditional \fBrename\fR(1) command): the program acts on the arguments you
give it, not on their contents. Globbing is left to the shell, so
\fBrename-simple\fR \fI*.jpg\fR renames every matching file, and (with a shell
that supports recursive globs, e.g. \fBzsh\fR or \fBbash\fR with
\fIglobstar\fR) \fBrename-simple\fR \fIdir/**/*.pdf\fR cleans a whole subtree.
.PP
Both files and directories are renamed by default; \fB\-f\fR / \fB\-d\fR act as
a type filter on the arguments. When \fBno\fR argument is given, the program
prints its help and exits.
.PP
The transformation pipeline is:
.IP 1. 4
Transliterate accented and non-ASCII characters to their ASCII equivalents
(e.g. é -> e, ß -> ss, Æ -> ae).
.IP 2. 4
Replace all remaining special characters with a hyphen (\fB\-\fR).
.IP 3. 4
Collapse consecutive hyphens into a single hyphen.
.IP 4. 4
Clean underscore/hyphen boundaries (\fI_-\fR and \fI-_\fR become \fI_\fR).
.IP 5. 4
Collapse consecutive underscores.
.IP 6. 4
Strip leading and trailing hyphens and underscores.
.PP
Compound extensions (\fI.tar.gz\fR, \fI.tar.bz2\fR, \fI.tar.xz\fR,
\fI.tar.zst\fR) are preserved. An extension is only kept separate when it
consists entirely of ASCII alphanumeric characters and is at most 10 characters
long.  Extensions containing accents, spaces, punctuation or exceeding 10
characters are re-absorbed into the filename stem and processed through the
full transliteration pipeline.
.PP
Hidden files (names starting with a dot) are never modified.
.PP
By default the program produces no output on success. Use
\fB\-v\fR/\fB\-\-verbose\fR to display details.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-f
Rename files only.
.TP
.B \-d
Rename directories only.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Show details of each rename operation and a summary.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-dry-run
Show what would be renamed without actually renaming any entry.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
All entries were renamed successfully (or no entries needed renaming).
.TP
1
An error occurred (invalid arguments, I/O error, etc.).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Rename specific files (the arguments themselves)
rename-simple "Mon Fichier.txt" *.jpg
.TP
Rename both files and directories in the current directory
rename-simple *
.TP
Rename files only, with verbose output
rename-simple \-f \-v ~/Downloads/*
.TP
Preview what would be renamed without touching anything
rename-simple \-n \-v *
.TP
Rename every PDF under a directory (zsh / bash globstar)
rename-simple ~/Documents/**/*.pdf
.TP
Rename directories only
rename-simple \-d *
.SH AUTHOR
Written by darkone-linux.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
.B GitHub:
.UR https://github.com/darkone-linux/rename-simple
https://github.com/darkone-linux/rename-simple
.UE
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \[co] 2026 darkone-linux.
License MIT: <https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mv (1),
.BR rename (1)
